---
title: Tart shell
tags: cake
date: 2011-05-01
---

*source: Jamie Oliver*

Tart shell
==========

makes 2

### Ingredients

For 2 tart bases of 30cm:

-   250g butter
-   200g icing sugar
-   Pinch of salt
-   500g flour
-   4 egg yolks (no joking)
-   4 tablespoons cold milk or water

### Method

Before you begin making your pastry dough, keep in mind that you want to
get your ingredients in a dough form with the minimum amount of mixing.
The more you work the dough, the more elastic it will become.

This dough can be made by hand or in a food processor. Cream together
the butter, sugar and salt and then rub or pulse in the flour and egg
yolks (make sure not to over mix; if using a food processor keep pulses
very short). When this mixture has come together, looking like coarse
breadcrumbs, add the cold milk or water. (If using a food processor you
might want to move your dough to a bowl before adding milk or water to
ensure you do not over work the dough.) Pat and gently work together to
form a ball of dough. Lightly flour and push, pat and squeeze into
shape.

Roll or mould the pastry dough into a really large, short and fat
sausage shape. Wrap in plastic wrap and place in the refrigerator for at
least 1hour.

Remove from refrigerator and slice off thin slivers of the dough
lengthwise, about 1/8 of an inch thick. (I have found that using about
an 8” slicer makes this task very easy.) Place slivers in and around the
bottom and sides of your 12-inch tart pan, fitting them together like a
sort of jigsaw puzzle. Then push the pieces together, level out, and
clean off excess pastry from the sides of the pan. Once you have
finished lining your pan cover the pan with plastic wrap and place in
the freezer for at least an hour. (This recipe makes two 12” tart
shells, so you can line your tart pans and store them in the freezer
until you need them. Once you have the crust done, it is easy to whip up
a filling and have a fresh tart for company.)

Preheat oven to 180 degrees C. Bake the shell for about 15 minutes. This
will cook the tart shell all the way through, colouring it slightly.

