---
title: Declaration-driven Frameworks: a Language-agnositic Approach
authors: Paul van der Walt, Charles Consel and Emilie Balland
subline: Under consideration for OOPSLA 2014.
---

### Abstract

Download full article here: [pdf](/pdf/oopsla14.pdf)

Programming frameworks are an accepted fixture in the
object-oriented world, motivated by the need for code reuse,
application developer guidance and restriction. A new trend is
emerging where frameworks supporting open platform offer
domain-specific declarations to address concerns such as
privacy. These declarations are used to drive the behaviour of the
resulting application. Although most popular platforms (_e.g.,_ Android)
are based on declaration-driven frameworks, they provide ad hoc and
narrow solutions to concerns raised by their openness. In
particular, existing programming frameworks are approached from an
implementation viewpoint, in that they are specific to a particular
programming language and domain.

In this paper, we show that declaration-driven frameworks can
provide programming support, constraints, and guarantees in a wide
spectrum of programming languages. To do so, we identify concepts
that underlie declaration-driven frameworks and apply them uniformly
to both an object-oriented language, Java, as well as a dynamically
typed functional language, Racket. From this case study, we propose
principles for developing declaration-driven frameworks that apply
across programming languages, covering a spectrum of domains.
